docs: add Notes doc to concept and build section (WIP) (#4690)
AztecProtocol/aztec-packages: docs/docs/learn/concepts/storage/notes.md

---
title: Understanding Notes
description: Core knowledge of Notes and how they work
---

> Most prominant blockchain networks don't have privacy at the protocol level. Aztec contracts can define public and private functions, that can read/write public and private state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most prominent blockchain networks don't have privacy at the protocol level. Aztec contracts can define public and private functions, that can read/write public and private state.
```

> Most prominent blockchain networks don't have privacy at the protocol level. Aztec contracts can define public and private functions, that can read/write public and private state.

Author: Added a clarifying point.
I wrote this assuming little prior knowledge beyond knowing Aztec is a privacy preserving protocol with smart contracts.

For private state we need encryption and techniques to hide information about state changes. For private functions, we need local execution and proof of correct execution.

### Some context

> - public functions and storage work much like other blockchains in terms of having dedicated storage slots

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Public functions and storage work much like other blockchains in terms of having dedicated storage slots
```

- Private functions are executed locally with proofs generated for sound execution, and commitments to private variable updates are stored using append-only trees

> - "Note" types are part of Aztec.nr, a framework that facilitates use of Aztec's different storage trees to achieve private variables. Note: there are more uses beyond this

Author: I don't want to constrain the reader's thinking of limiting Notes to private variables only. Rephrased consicely.

> - "Note" types are part of aztec.nr, a framework that facilitates use of Aztec's different storage trees to achieve private variables. Note: there are more uses beyond this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- "Note" types are part of Aztec.nr, a framework that facilitates use of Aztec's different storage trees to achieve private variables. Note: there are more uses beyond this.
```

Reviewer: I'm not sure we actually need this. Maybe just mention something along the lines of "Notes are abstracted for smart contract developers through the Aztec.nr framework. You can read more about that here (link to other doc in build)

Author: That omits the Why of notes, what it seeks to achieve (private variables and more). Also see comments at this section in original hackmd.

> This article will restrict its focus to how private variables are implemented with Notes and relevant storage trees. NB: these components can be used in a variety of ways to implement different attributes such as: singletons, unique value, or private sharing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page will restrict its focus to how private variables are implemented with Notes and relevant storage trees. NB: these components can be used in a variety of ways to implement different attributes such as: singletons, unique value, or private sharing.
```

#### Side-note about execution
Under the hood, the Aztec protocol handles some important details around public and private function calls. Notably around calls between them and relevant delays to avoid race conditions around state reads/writes (more [here](../pxe/acir_simulator#simulating-functions)).
Whilst it just works for us under the hood, a detailed explanation of the transaction lifecycle can be found [here](../transactions#simple-example-of-the-private-transaction-lifecycle).

## Private state variables in Aztec

> State variables in an Aztec contract are defined inside a struct specifically named `Storage`, and must satisfy the [Note Interface](https://github.com/AztecProtocol/aztec-packages/tree/#include_aztec_version/noir-projects/aztec-nr/aztec/src/note/note_interface.nr) and contain a [Note header](https://github.com/AztecProtocol/aztec-packages/tree/#include_aztec_version/noir-projects/aztec-nr/aztec/src/note/note_header.nr).

Reviewer: this is developer stuff. can we reword for technical non-devs?

Author: I presume the reader is a developer for this explainer. But I can drop the fact that it's a struct?

Author: At this point we're introducing a lot of things to the reader at once from 0, so am attempting to go breadth-first rather than depth first where the initial context is lost. The intention is to define things that are used in the actions (reading/writing private variables) rather than peeking further under the hood such as why a Note Interface is part of the protocol.
Happy to drop this in favour of a more dense explainer, but would rather validate on some new users as potential data points to the different approaches.

Author: I think resolved if placed as single explainer in build section.

The Note header struct contains the contract address which the value is effectively siloed to, a nonce to ensure unique Note hashes, and a storage "slot" (or ID) to associate multiple notes.

A couple of things to unpack here:

#### Storage "slot"
Storage slots are more literal for public storage, a place where a value is stored. For private storage, a storage slot is logical (more [here](./storage_slots#private-state-slots---slots-arent-real)).

#### Silos
The address of the contract is included in a Note's data to ensure contracts don't arrive at the same hash with an identical variable. This is handled in the protocol's execution.

### Note types

> There is more than one Note type, such as the `Set` type is used for private variables. There are also `Singleton` and `ImmutableSingleton` types.

Author: I previously hadn't mentioned note types, to not distract from the flow of understanding some fundamentals first. Now I feel expanding upon the different types will be distracting from the flow.
Like the previous comment, can swap out this intended learning flow for a more dense doc.

> There is more than one Note type, but the `Set` type is most useful for private variables. There are also `Singleton` and `ImmutableSingleton` types.

Reviewer: Avoid opinions. `Set` isn't more or less useful than others, they're used for different reasons
```suggestion
There is more than one Note type, such as `Set` `Singleton` and `ImmutableSingleton` types.
```

Author: Rephrased.

> Furthermore, notes can be completely custom types, storing any value or set of values that are desired by an application.

Author: This is introduced in the second section (split again into build at the time of writing this comment)

> ### Initialisation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Initialization
```

Private state variables are encrypted and stored locally when the contract is created. Depending on the application, values may be privately shared by the creator with others via encrypted logs onchain.

> A hash of a note is stored in the append-only note hash tree so as to prove existence of the current state of the note.

Reviewer: Link to append-only hash tree

Author: It is mentioned in the following section.
The goal for this section is to go into enough depth and maintain some flow, rather than invite the user to leave for something much deeper at this stage (they can always search if they want that).

I can re-add references to the end if it makes sense, I had taken them out since there were many on storage/trees.

#### Note Hash Tree

> By virtue of being append only, notes are not edited. If two transactions amend a private value, multiple notes will be inserted into the tree. The header will contain the same logical storage slot.

Reviewer: maybe mention nullifier tree here? when a note is updated, both a nullifier and a note is created

Author: Nullifying is introduced in the next section.

### Reading Notes

> Info:

Author: :::info section

- Only those with appropriate keys/information will be able to successfully read private values that they have permission to
- Notes can be read outside of a transaction or "off-chain" with no changes to data structures on-chain

> When a note is read in a transaction, a subsequent read from another transaction of the same note would reveal a link between the two. So to preserve privacy, notes that are read in a transaction are said to be "consumed" (defined below), and new note(s) are then created with an incremented nonce.

Author: You're right, according to YP the note nonce is a hash of the tx id with the note hash nonce. Will update.

Being of type `Set`, a private variable's value is interpreted as the sum of values of notes with the same logical storage slot.

> Consuming, deleting, or otherwise "nullifying" a note is NOT done by deleting the Note hash, this would leak information, but rather by creating a nullifier deterministically linked to the value. This nullifier is inserted into another storage tree, aptly named the nullifier tree.

Reviewer: link to nullifier tree docs

Author: Reticent to break the readers flow and invite them to something at a different depth. A curious reader will quickly learn the value of Search & `Ctrl+Enter`

When interpreting a value the Aztec.nr framework checks that its notes (of the corresponding storage slot/ID) have not been nullified.

### Updating

> Note: only those with appropriate keys/information will be able to successfully nullify a value that they have permission to.

Author: :::note section

> To update a value, its previous note hash(es) are nullified. The new note value is updated in the PXE, and the updated note hash inserted into the note hash tree. This also increments the nonce.

Author: Removed reference to nonce here, there are a couple at play which I think is a bit deep to tease apart here.
